STOBE Local Latency Investigation Context
Focus: Trade-intent polling / stobeRefreshNpcDataForTraderInventory()
Date: 2026-09-30

PURPOSE
This file captures the investigation findings for the trade-intent latency path:
why stobeRefreshNpcDataForTraderInventory() adds about 806 ms on many trade/equipment-related dialogue turns.

This is intended to be re-uploaded later so another agent can continue investigating the trade inventory data flow and decide whether the polling behavior should be changed.

IMPORTANT
No behavior changes were made during this investigation.
This file records observed timings, exact code behavior, what is already proven, and the remaining open questions.

PRIMARY FINDING
The ~806 ms delay is directly explained by an intentional polling loop inside:

processor/chat.php
stobeRefreshNpcDataForTraderInventory()

The function does this:

1. Check whether trader inventory metadata is already present.
2. If inventory exists, return immediately.
3. Determine whether:
   - the NPC is likely a trader, OR
   - the player's message looks like trade intent.
4. If neither condition is true, return immediately.
5. Otherwise poll up to 8 times.
6. Before each poll:
   - sleep 100 ms
7. Reload NPC data with getNpcData($targetNpc).
8. Check whether trader inventory metadata has appeared.
9. If inventory appears, return immediately.
10. If all 8 attempts fail, return the latest NPC data after the full wait.

Relevant code behavior:

$maxAttempts = 8;
$sleepMs = 100;

for ($attempt = 1; $attempt <= $maxAttempts; $attempt++) {
    usleep($sleepMs * 1000);
    $refreshed = getNpcData($targetNpc);
    ...
}

Therefore the full wait is:

8 x 100 ms = 800 ms

plus a few milliseconds of database reads and PHP overhead.

This exactly matches the measured:
~805-807 ms

OBSERVED TIMING PATTERN
Normal dialogue turns:

trader_refresh:
0 ms

Trade/equipment-intent turns:

trader_refresh:
~805-807 ms

Examples from Malzin testing:

"Here is your three hundred cats."
trader_refresh:
805 ms

"Malzin, here are 99999 cats."
trader_refresh:
807 ms

"Malzin, 2500 cats for your iron hat and your black cloth shirt, both off. Deal?"
trader_refresh:
806 ms

"Malzin, would you take off your iron hat for 1000 cats and five pieces of dried meat?"
trader_refresh:
806 ms

"Malzin, 500 cats and you take off your black cloth shirt and your shorts. Would you do that"
trader_refresh:
806 ms

Ordinary examples:

"Everything alright?"
trader_refresh:
0 ms

"Thanks Malzin. Quiet night in here, huh?"
trader_refresh:
0 ms

"Malzin, put your iron hat back on."
trader_refresh:
0 ms

This shows the delay is deterministic and tied to the trade-intent path, not random system load.

IMPACT ON TOTAL PRE-LLM LATENCY
Normal Malzin conversation:
pre-LLM typically around:
0.46-0.60 s

Trade/equipment-intent Malzin conversation:
pre-LLM typically around:
1.27-1.42 s

The extra ~0.8 s is almost entirely explained by stobeRefreshNpcDataForTraderInventory().

Example:

Normal:
"Everything alright?"
pre-LLM:
457 ms

Trade:
"Malzin, 2500 cats for your iron hat and your black cloth shirt, both off. Deal?"
pre-LLM:
1422 ms

Difference:
~965 ms

Of that:
~806 ms is trader_refresh

The rest is ordinary variation in prompt construction and other local work.

TRADE-INTENT DETECTION
The helper:

stobeMessageLooksTradeIntent()

currently performs a simple keyword scan.

Keywords include:

- trade
- trading
- business
- shop
- buy
- sell
- for sale
- cats
- price
- cost
- merchant
- vendor

If ANY of these substrings appear in the message, trade intent becomes true.

This means messages that merely mention "cats" can trigger the trader inventory polling path.

Examples:
"Malzin, here are 99999 cats."
will trigger trade intent.

This is an important design detail because the polling path is not limited to explicit shop interactions.

TRADER INVENTORY PRESENCE CHECK
The function first calls:

stobeTraderInventoryEntryCountFromNpcData()

This checks NPC metadata for:

trader_inventory_items

If trader_inventory_items contains valid named entries, the count is returned.

If that is empty, it also checks:

trader_shop_sources

and:
trader_shop_item_count

If shop sources exist, the helper returns at least 1.

If neither inventory entries nor shop source metadata exists:
count = 0

Only when count = 0 does the polling path remain eligible.

LIKELY PURPOSE OF THE POLLING LOOP
Based on the code structure, the polling appears designed to handle asynchronous arrival of trader inventory metadata from the Kenshi/plugin side.

Likely intended sequence:

player says something trade-related
-> server realizes trader/shop data may be needed
-> plugin/game-side trader inventory metadata may arrive shortly after
-> server waits up to ~800 ms
-> server reloads NPC profile repeatedly
-> if inventory data appears, it can include it in the prompt

This is consistent with the log message:

"Chat trader metadata hydration succeeded"

when inventory appears during polling.

If inventory never appears, the function logs:

"Chat trader metadata hydration timed out"

and continues with the latest NPC data.

IMPORTANT:
The exact producer of trader_inventory_items / trader_shop_sources has not yet been fully traced.
That is one of the main open questions.

WHY THIS MATTERS
The delay is not just a small optimization issue.

For voice interaction, an extra ~806 ms before the LLM request is noticeable.

Combined with provider TTFT:
normal turn:
~0.5 s local + provider latency

trade turn:
~1.3 s local + provider latency

So on a 3-second LLM TTFT:
normal turn might start around ~3.5-4 s
trade turn might start around ~4.3-4.8 s

The trade path therefore adds a substantial perceived delay before the NPC starts speaking.

WHAT HAS BEEN PROVEN
The following are established from code and measurements:

1. The ~806 ms delay is intentional waiting, not random slowness.

2. It is caused by:
8 polling attempts x 100 ms sleep.

3. The delay occurs only when:
- trader inventory metadata is absent, AND
- NPC is likely a trader OR player message matches trade intent.

4. Ordinary dialogue avoids the polling delay.

5. Messages containing "cats" alone are enough to trigger trade intent.

6. The polling loop repeatedly reloads NPC data using getNpcData($targetNpc).

7. If trader inventory appears before attempt 8, the function can exit early.

8. In the tested Malzin turns, many trade-intent requests appear to consume the full ~805-807 ms, strongly suggesting the expected metadata is not arriving during the polling window.

IMPORTANT:
Point 8 is strongly implied by the exact full-duration timings, but the per-attempt success/failure logs were not yet correlated for every test turn.
That should be verified explicitly in the next investigation.

WHAT HAS NOT YET BEEN PROVEN
The following remain open:

1. What exact game/plugin event populates:
trader_inventory_items

2. What populates:
trader_shop_sources

3. Whether that metadata is expected to arrive:
- before the chat request
- during the chat request
- only after a separate plugin event
- only when a real shop/trade UI is open

4. Whether Malzin is actually supposed to ever have trader inventory metadata.

5. Whether generic negotiation around the NPC's personal equipment should use this trader inventory hydration path at all.

6. Whether messages like:
"here are 99999 cats"
should trigger trader inventory polling.

7. Whether the plugin is sending the relevant inventory data but too late.

8. Whether the server is polling the wrong data source or wrong NPC row.

9. Whether the metadata is being written, then overwritten/cleared before the server reads it.

10. Whether the 800 ms timeout was chosen based on real plugin timing or is simply a conservative delay.

11. Whether early exit is actually happening in any current live scenarios.

12. Whether this path was designed mainly for true merchants but is now being triggered by personal negotiation features added later.

OPEN QUESTION: PERSONAL EQUIPMENT VS TRADER INVENTORY
This is particularly important for Malzin.

Many test messages were not merchant-shop interactions.

They were things like:

- paying him to remove his hat
- paying him for clothing
- giving Cats during a personal deal
- negotiating over items he is wearing or carrying

Those use trade-like language but are conceptually:
NPC negotiation / equipment exchange

not necessarily:
merchant shop inventory

If the polling function is waiting for merchant inventory metadata that will never exist for a normal NPC, the full 800 ms wait may be fundamentally unnecessary in these cases.

This is one of the strongest hypotheses to investigate.

OPEN QUESTION: KEYWORD FALSE POSITIVES
Current trade detection is broad.

Because "cats" is a trigger, messages such as:

"Malzin, here are 99999 cats."

cause the same polling behavior as:

"What do you have for sale?"

This may be intentional if all Cats-related interactions need fresh inventory state.

But it may also be an overly broad trigger.

Need to determine:

- which downstream prompt/action logic truly requires trader inventory
- whether generic negotiations only need current equipment/inventory already stored in npcData
- whether real merchant interactions can be detected more precisely

OPEN QUESTION: WHY FULL 800 MS SO OFTEN?
Measured trade_refresh values repeatedly land at:

805 ms
806 ms
807 ms

This strongly indicates:
all 8 attempts are being exhausted.

If metadata were often arriving on attempt 2 or 3, timings would cluster around:
200-300 ms

If attempt 5:
~500 ms

Instead, the repeated ~806 ms pattern suggests:
the loop frequently waits until timeout.

That raises an important question:

Is the data source simply never expected to update for these requests?

If yes, the polling delay is pure wasted latency for those cases.

RECOMMENDED NEXT INVESTIGATION
No code change yet.

The next investigation should trace the full producer/consumer path for trader inventory metadata.

Specifically:

1. Find every place that writes:
trader_inventory_items

2. Find every place that writes:
trader_shop_sources

3. Find every place that writes:
trader_shop_item_count

4. Determine whether those values are written by:
- Kenshi plugin
- STOBE PHP
- another process
- inventory sync event
- shop UI event

5. Inspect logs around the exact 8 polling attempts for a trade turn.

6. Determine whether any inventory-sync event arrives during those ~800 ms.

7. Determine whether getNpcData() is reading the expected updated source.

8. Compare:
- a true merchant NPC
- a normal NPC like Malzin
- an NPC with known trader metadata

9. Check whether early success ever occurs and on which attempt.

10. Determine whether Malzin's personal equipment/inventory data is already available elsewhere before the polling starts.

11. Determine whether the negotiation/action system actually needs trader_inventory_items for personal equipment deals.

12. Determine whether "cats" should remain a generic trade-intent trigger.

13. Inspect whether a plugin-side inventory sync request is explicitly triggered before this polling loop.
If not, the server may simply be waiting without asking anything to refresh.

POTENTIAL FUTURE OPTIMIZATION DIRECTIONS
These are hypotheses only.
Do not implement before tracing the data flow.

Possible approaches depending on findings:

A. Skip polling for non-trader NPCs
Only poll when is_trader is true or real merchant/shop context exists.

B. Separate merchant-shop intent from personal negotiation intent
Example:
"what do you sell?" -> trader inventory polling
"1000 cats for your hat" -> negotiation/equipment data only

C. Trigger an explicit inventory refresh before polling
Only if the plugin supports a fast request/response path.

D. Reduce poll count or sleep duration
Only if actual metadata arrival usually happens faster.

E. Use event-driven hydration instead of fixed polling
If plugin can notify server when inventory metadata is ready.

F. Reuse already-current NPC equipment/inventory metadata
If the information needed for the prompt is already present.

G. Cache trader inventory for a short window
Useful if inventory does not change between every dialogue turn.

H. Poll only when metadata is stale, not merely empty
If freshness timestamps are available.

I. Remove "cats" as a broad trigger
Only if investigation confirms it causes unnecessary polling.

J. Differentiate:
merchant inventory
personal inventory
worn equipment
negotiation state

The current helper appears to blur these concepts.

RELATED LOCAL TIMING CONTEXT
Other measured local costs:

normal system prompt:
~300-440 ms

regular memory:
~22-29 ms

event history:
~30-40 ms

profile lookup:
~16-22 ms

message assembly:
~9 ms

The trade polling delay:
~806 ms

is therefore the single largest deterministic local delay currently observed.

It is larger than the entire normal pre-LLM pipeline by itself.

CONCLUSION
The original question was:

Why does stobeRefreshNpcDataForTraderInventory() consume almost exactly ~806 ms whenever trade intent is detected?

Answer:

Because the function intentionally waits up to 8 times for trader inventory metadata, sleeping 100 ms before each reload.

8 x 100 ms = 800 ms

plus small DB/PHP overhead produces the observed:
~805-807 ms

The important unresolved question is not why it takes 806 ms.

That is fully explained.

The important unresolved question is:

Why is the function frequently reaching the full timeout, and does the requested trader inventory metadata actually need to be refreshed for these Malzin-style personal negotiation turns at all?

That is the next investigation target.
